report summary 2021 (#244)
kubernetes/steering: reports/summary-2021.md

## Annual Report summary 21/22

This is a summary of the Kubernetes project’s contributor community and
activities. This report documents both quantitative measures of community
health (project milestones and snapshot) as well as qualitative measures of the
community as reported by community leaders and contributors to the project.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

Authors: The Kubernetes Steering Committee
Editor: Tim Bannister, @sftim, sig-docs Tech Lead 
```

## Terminology

This report uses the following terminology:

- **Special Interest Group (SIG):** a body of contributors, responsible on an
  ongoing basis for an area of work in the Kubernetes project. They own code,
  docs, and/or policy.
- **Working Group (WG):** a body of contributors, responsible for an area of work
  in the project. Unlike SIGs, WGs dissolve once the scoped work is complete.
  Working groups are cross-functional efforts sponsored by a SIG.
- **Community Groups:** all of our official groups of the upstream project. Special
  Interest Groups + Working Groups + Committees = community groups. For a full
  list, visit the Kubernetes Contributor Site at: https://k8s.dev/groups 
- **Chair and/or Tech Lead:** a contributor who organizes and leads a community group.

> - **KEP:** a [Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal][kep]

Author: ```suggestion
- **Contributor:** An individual who creates an event in GitHub like a Pull Request, Issue, Review, or Comment
- **KEP:** a [Kubernetes Enhancement Proposal][kep]
```

  [`OWNERS` file]. Maintainer is a good industry synonym.
- **Contributor Ladder:** [member, reviewer, approver, subproject owner].

For the community group mailing list, meeting times, and other contact info visit:
https://k8s.dev/groups

For community groups governance:
  - [SIG governance]
  - [WG governance]

[`OWNERS` file]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/docs/guide/owners/
[member, reviewer, approver, subproject owner]: https://git.k8s.io/community/community-membership.md
[SIG governance]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/sig-governance.md
[WG governance]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/wg-governance.md

## Data collection

The Kubernetes Steering Committee sent out a survey to all community group
leads to collect data for this report. Each individual group report may be
found in their respective directory inside the [Kubernetes Community repo].

For more, see:
[Program Documentation]

[Program Documentation]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/committee-steering/governance/annual-reports.md

## Contributor snapshot

> 66000 

Author: ```suggestion
62000 
```

contributors all time

> TODO: add a contributors for the year

Author: ```suggestion
10000 new contributors this year
```

1 
new working group

5 
new chairs and tech leads 

10 or less 
unique reviewers in 8 groups

8.29 
average active meeting participants in each group

~70000 
slack members in SIG/WG rooms

[Kubernetes Community repo]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community

### Accolades

On behalf of the project, we'd like to say thanks to the following contributors,
community groups, and ecosystem for the following highlights. As always, give
praise to an effort in `#shoutouts` on Kubernetes slack.

#### Feature Maturity and Stability

Thanks to our groups for continuing the efforts from 2020, many SIGs continue
to drive long standing beta features to graduate to stable.

Several features that graduated to stable or made notable progress include:
- [CSI Plugins on Windows Nodes] graduated to stable in v1.22 (SIG Windows)
- [Generic ephemeral inline volumes] graduated to stable in v1.23 (SIG
  Storage)
- [IPv4/IPv6 dual-stack] graduated to stable in v1.23 (SIG Network)
- [Metrics stability framework] graduated to stable in v1.21 (SIG
  Instrumentation)
- [Server-side Apply] graduated to stable in v1.22 (SIG API Machinery)
- [Client credential plugins] graduated to stable in v1.22 (SIG Auth)

> - [kubetest2] is maturing (SIG Testing)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Kubetest2] is maturing (SIG Testing)
```

[reviewers and approvers should apply]: https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev/c/6F3h0Z1QzVg

#### Independent contributors play a critial role on the project

A misconception is that this project is just cloud providers maintaining it;
however, one of our biggest contributor bases are "[independent]" that is, not
affliated with an organization. 

There is space for everyone here. 

[independent]: https://k8s.devstats.cncf.io/d/8/company-statistics-by-repository-group?orgId=1&from=1609480800000&to=1641016800000&viewPanel=1&var-period=d7&var-metric=committers&var-repogroup_name=All&var-repo_name=kubernetes%2Fkubernetes&var-companies=All

##### What have we done?

Connect folks to jobs! While not all indie contributors are looking for
employment, many are. This year we worked with CNCF to add a feature to the
[cncf.jobs.io site], which allows employers to indicate a percentage of time
that they would support upstream activities. The Kubernetes project needs more
contributors with employer-backed time, and this was a great step toward that
goal. Aligning contributors with the right incentives is the sweet spot for
lasting contributions. 

> [cncf.jobs.io site]: https://cncf.jobs.io

Reviewer: Nor for me

part of the annual report process should ensure that project contributing docs
remain (relatively) up-to-date.

[auditing]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/issues/5229

#### Areas to research 

Updating documentation is usually a good onboarding path for interns and 
new contributors but this can get murky with some of the complexities of
the code and doc set. It can take up to 3 months to onboard on to the project
before suggestion and submitting changes. Is there a program that SIGs could
create as an onboarding path towards OWNERship here? 

#### Burnout 

The topics of burnout and workload management are frequent in our Leads and 
group meetings, Steering Committee, and even the growing voices at ecosystem
level during talks and events at KubeCon/CloudNativeCons. This is an industry
wide problem that we need to solve together. With a mix of reasons why 
contributors are burning out, there is no one solve all solution here. 
Aligning incentives to grow OWNERs seems to be one of the main challenges in 
this space. 

#### What have we done
- Reducing the release cadence. While this wasn't the only reason for having 

> 3 and not 4 releases in a year, 

Author: ```suggestion
3 and not 4 releases in a year, it factored in. [Check out this blog for more on the release cadence change](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/07/20/new-kubernetes-release-cadence/).
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- Continue to talk about how we can do better in our monthly Chairs and Tech Leads and keeping our doors open for contributors to have these conversations with us.
- Keep educating contributors and OWNERs on the use of "Emeritus" and why it's ok to take breaks.
```

### Growth Areas

> An area of the project that we've identified as having a growth opportunity or need to grow

Author: ```suggestion
This section represents an area of the project that we've identified as having a growth opportunity or need.
```

Reviewers are a key part of our success in quality code and documentation changes upstream. Reviewer is the next step on our [contributor ladder](link to URL) post member 
- talk about showing up and sticking around
- talk about chopping wood and carrying water first 
- maybe include the reviewer graph stats 

#### The 9 to 5 contributor is almost over and we have to adjust

Only a handful of our OWNERs, some of our most active contributors, will tell
you that they work 80-100% upstream. These folks know the codebase and docs
extensively and are some of our most experienced reviewer eyes. But anecdotally,
the number of experienced and very active core folks able to contribute has
decreased in recent years. Ensuring continuity and growing more people into
senior roles is becoming critical for the project to continue to deliver a
robust and reliable releases.

In 2022 we have started discussion the CNCF Governing Board to see how we can
tackle long term strategies together.
- How can we incentivize growth in this area of sustainers?
- How can we surface areas of risk that require investment to keep going?
- Are there additional actions we might take in the short term?

> #### This reporting process and it's summary 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### This reporting process and its summary
```

#### This reporting process and its summary

This process takes us 6 months. This is both not sustainable and not helpful.
Between our groups being heads down shipping reliable and stable enhancements, 

> societal challenges and atrocities that effect us like the war in Ukraine and 

Reviewer 2: Mixing a spelling fix with a rewording for clarity:
```suggestion
societal challenges and atrocities that affect us such the war in Ukraine, not to mention
```

own challenges that they are living through. 

With the theme of burnout, how can we support groups without bogging them down
with paperwork? How can we communicate our needs at a level that hears and takes
action on them? We need to build more tooling in this area and will be putting out
a call for interns soon. [Have other advice for us?]

[Have other advice for us?]: https://github.com/kubernetes/steering/issues/242

## Help Wanted

#### [SIG API Machinery](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-api-machinery/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

- Client libraries 
- Triage
- Sticking around and growing into contributor ladder roles 

#### [SIG Apps](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-apps/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

> SIG Apps is looking to grow their pool of [reviewer and appprover]. Contributors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SIG Apps is looking to grow their pool of [reviewers and appprovers]. Contributors
```

looking at growing into these roles can join the[SIG Apps / SIG CLI Review club].

> [reviewer and appprover]: #OWNERmaintainer

Reviewer 2: That fragment target might change as the result of other fixes.

[SIG Apps / SIG CLI Review club]: https://groups.google.com/g/kubernetes-sig-apps/c/aTymvEPd2y0/m/HbqV7NiZBAAJ

#### [SIG Auth](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-auth/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

SIG Auth keeps a running list of [KEPs that need help] and tracks their progress
on their [SIG Auth project board]. They are also looking for help in enhancing
their own [onboarding guide and PR review guidance].

Specifically SIG Auth is looking for help in these initatives:
- [KMS-Plugin: Improvements](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YHzSzITSS3ZNpf63E-rseDo-ocpxexp3ttzjBU2P8Ck/edit?usp=sharing)
- Specifying multiple webhooks in the kube-apiserver authorization chain
- Structured config for OIDC authentication
- Audit logging improvements

> - system:masters rename

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Renaming the `system:masters` group
```

 

[KEPs that need help]: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sY8fRyRtk4eG9R439z5ao5i9bFuuxilS03XaNlqoni0/edit
[onboarding guide and PR review guidance]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/sig-auth/CONTRIBUTING.md
[SIG Auth project board]: https://github.com/orgs/kubernetes/projects/54

#### [SIG CLI](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cli/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

SIG CLI has three areas where they're looking for more help:
- Optimizing [kubectl memory usage].
- Contributors that can dedicate time and grow into maintainer roles (reviewer /
  approver) for [Kustomize].

> - SIG-CLI's docs for both kubectl and kustomize need additional support. They

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- SIG CLI's docs for both kubectl and kustomize need additional support. They
```

  are built off [cli-experimental], are outdated, need SEO improvements and

>   migrated to the new kustomize.io and kubectl.io domains.

Reviewer 2: Is it OK to suggest:
```suggestion
  migrated to the new kustomize.io and kubectl.io domains. Alignment with k8s.io docs
  would be useful too.
```

#### [SIG Cloud Provider](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cloud-provider/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

SIG Cloud Provider needs more support from cloud providers to
[extract the provider specific code] from the main Kubernetes repo. Spinning
them out will create a smaller and more secure core, while enabling the Cloud
Providers to release and update their components on their own cadence.

[extract the provider specific code]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-cloud-provider/2395-removing-in-tree-cloud-providers

#### [SIG Contributor Experience](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-contributor-experience/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

The SIG is looking for a full time community manager. Also, there are three
[subprojects][contribex-sp] where [SIG Contributor Experience] could use assistance.

- [GitHub Administration]
  - The GitHub Admin team needs more [new membership coordinators]. These
    coordinators are current contributors that help serve as a friendly face
    to newer, prospective community members, guiding them through the process
    to request membership to a Kubernetes GitHub organization.
- [Community Management Automation]

>   - [Auto upload recordings from Zoom to Youtube]

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
  - [Auto upload recordings from Zoom to YouTube]
```

published articles;  other editors are perhaps even more stretched with other
Kubernetes contributions and involvement with other SIGs.

The Ukrainian localization team is primarily worked on by people based in Ukraine,
where the ongoing and intensifying conflict creates challenges that take priority
over open source contribution.
     
[SIG Docs]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-docs/
[Blog subproject]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-docs/blog-subproject/

#### [SIG Instrumentation](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-instrumentation/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

The [Prometheus Adapter subproject] is in need of additional contributors that
can grow and commit to becoming [reviewer/approvers]. It currently only has one
active approver and is used a number of endusers.

[Prometheus Adapter subproject]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/prometheus-adapter
[reviewer/approvers]: #OWNERmaintainer

#### [SIG K8s Infra](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-k8s-infra/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

SIG K8s Infra is looking for engineers to help build tools to automate more of the
project's infrastructure and to help migrate more tests to community owned resources.

> Please show up to #sig-k8s-infra on slack to help with this important group. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please show up to #sig-k8s-infra on Slack to help with this important group.
(You can get an invitation to Slack from https://slack.k8s.io/)
```

#### [SIG Release](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-release/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

SIG Release is looking for more contributors in a number of subprojects
- [kubernetes-sigs/bom](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/bom) - A utility to
  generate SPDX-compliant Bill of Materials manifests
- [kubernetes-sigs/downloadkubernetes](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/downloadkubernetes) -
  The tool that generates the site downloadkubernetes.com, making it easier to
  download Kubernetes release artifacts
- [kubernetes-sigs/mdtoc](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/mdtoc) - A small

>   utility that generates markdown Table of Contents

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  utility that generates a Table of Contents in Markdown.
```

[subprojects][scale-sp]. Good entry points for new scalability contributors are
the [Scalability Test Framework] and [Performance Tests & Validaiton subproject].

[scale-sp]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/#subprojects
[Scalability Test Framework]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/#kubernetes-scalability-test-frameworks-1
[Performance Tests & Validaiton subproject]: https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scalability/#kubernetes-scalability-and-performance-tests-and-validation-1

#### [SIG Scheduling](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-scheduling/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

The [Scheduler Simulator], a project that allows for simulating and testing of
scheduling profiles/plugins needs more reviewers and approvers.

[Scheduler Simulator]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kube-scheduler-simulator

#### [SIG Security](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-security/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

The SIG Security [docs subproject] is always looking for security-minded
contributors of all experience levels to share their learning and knowledge
with the community. This subproject has consistently been a place where people

> merge their first Kubernetes PRs.There’s always room for continuous improvement

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
merge their first Kubernetes PRs. There’s always room for continuous improvement
```

  - Cannot continue to maintain https://monitoring.prow.k8s.io due to Grafana
    license change. Kubernetes has switched to using Google Cloud Monitoring,
    but cannot make the dashboards publicly visible.
- [Triage](https://git.k8s.io/test-infra/triage) - Tool for gathering and
  reporting similar test failures across all CI jobs
- [Kettle](https://git.k8s.io/test-infra/kettle) - Tool that collections CI
  job information and loads it into BigQuery for analysis

#### [SIG Windows](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-windows/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

SIG Windows has several areas it is looking for support, the largest being related
to [Windows Storage support/CSI Proxy].

Looking for full time contributors to help with:
- Testing hostProcess implementations on several windows apps
- Improving Windows dev tools to help grow the Windows contributor community
- Hardening the CSI proxy and CSI support ecosystem
- Performance testing Kubernetes on Windows

[Windows Storage support/CSI Proxy]: https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-proxy

#### [WG API Expression](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-api-expression/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

> - No Report

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_No Report_
```
?

#### [WG Data Protection](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-data-protection/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

- End users come to meetings and contribute to design/implementation of the features we are working on

#### [WG IoT/Edge](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-iot-edge/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

Spinning down inside of Kubernetes and heading to CNCF level 

#### [WG Multitenancy](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-multitenancy/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

> - https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/6598 open, but no help wanted items in that report

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No specific help needed! Contributions are still welcome.
```

#### [WG Structured Logging](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-structured-logging/annual-report-2021.md#project-health)

   - Graduate [Contextual Logging](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3077) to Beta and GA
   - Graduate [Deprecation of klog specific flags](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2845) to GA
   - Graduated [Structured Logging](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1602) to GA
   - All code in kubernetes/kubernetes repository is migrated to Structured Logging API

## Initiatives

#### [SIG API Machinery](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-api-machinery/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives)

API Machinery is evaluating the potential for generics in go1.19.

> There are a number of  [Other initiatives]

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
There are a number of [other initiatives].
```

[Other initiatives]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3Asig%2Fapi-machinery+updated%3A%3E%3D2021-01-01+is%3Aopen

#### [SIG Apps](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-apps/annual-report-2021.md#current-initatives)

> - Significant improvements were made to the job API. Finally driving Cronjobs
>   to stable and introduced several long-desired features. This work is expected
>   to continue through 2022 to finish rounding out the job API.

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
- Significant improvements were made to the Job API, along with finally driving CronJobs
  to stable and introduced several long-desired features. This work is expected
  to continue through 2022 to finish rounding out the Job API.
```

- Adds `--as-uid` flag to kubectl to allow uid impersonation in the same way as user and group impersonation [starting v1.23](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/105794)

- Stable
  - [1205-bound-service-account-tokens](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-auth/1205-bound-service-account-tokens/) - 1.22
  - [1393-oidc-discovery](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-auth/1393-oidc-discovery/README.md) - 1.21
  - [2907-secrets-store-csi-driver](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-auth/2907-secrets-store-csi-driver/) - 1.0.0
  - [541-external-credential-providers](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-auth/541-external-credential-providers/) - 1.22
  - [1687-hierarchical-namespaces-subproject](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-auth/1687-hierarchical-namespaces-subproject/) - stable
- Beta
  - [2579-psp-replacement](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-auth/2579-psp-replacement/) - 1.23
  - [2784-csr-duration](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-auth/2784-csr-duration/) - 1.22

#### [SIG CLI](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cli/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives)

> SIG CLI made progress on a number of initatives in 2021:

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
SIG CLI made progress on a number of initiatives in 2021:
```

- [Refactoring old kubectl commands](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubectl/issues/1046)

Kubernetes Enhancements
- Stable
  - [KEP-555 - Server-side apply](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/555) - 1.22
- Beta
  - [KEP-1441 - kubectl debug](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1441) - 1.20, continued to evolve the beta through the year
  - [KEP-859 - kubectl command metadata in http request headers](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/859) - 1.22
- Alpha
  - [KEP-1440 - kubectl events](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1440) - 1.23
  - [KEP-2227 - Default container annotation to be used by kubectl](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2227) - 1.21
- Pre-alpha
  - [KEP-2985 - Public KRM functions registry](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2985)
  - [KEP-2953 - Kustomize Plugin Graduation](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2953)
- Rejected
  - [KEP-2229 - Use XDG Base Directory Specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2229)

#### [SIG Cloud Provider](https://git.k8s.io/community/sig-cloud-provider/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives)

> No Report

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
_No Report_
```

During 2021, SIG Contributor Experience continued to provide a number of
services to the project and it's 75,000 contributors. Some achievements include
the [migration of the large public kubernetes-dev] mailing list to to managed
a project owned Google workspace, [developing Elekto], a replacement for the CIVS
voting system, and the seamless migration of the [CLA system to EasyCLA].

SIG Contributor Experience also ran the [North America Contributor Summit], the
end of year [Contributor Celebration], ran three successful mentoring cohorts,
and the [Contributor Comms team] automated and started using the [@k8scontributors] 
twitter account to reach 5700 follows with a number of them being contributors.

[migration of the large public kubernetes-dev]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/issues/5877
[developing Elekto]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/issues/5096
[CLA system to EasyCLA]: https://github.com/kubernetes/org/issues/2778
[North America Contributor Summit]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/events/past-events/2021/kcsna/
[Contributor Celebration]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/events/past-events/2021/kcc2021/
[@k8scontributors]: https://twitter.com/k8scontributors

> Contribex is a service and program orientated SIG. Most of it's initiatives

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contributor Experience (“ContribEx”) is a service and program orientated SIG. Most of its initiatives
```

Kubernetes Enhancements:
- Stable
  - [1209 - Metrics Stability](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/1209-metrics-stability) - 1.21
  - [1933 - Prevent logging secrets via static analysis](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/1753-logs-sanitization) - 1.23
- Beta
  - [1602 - Structured Logging](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/1602-structured-logging) - 1.23
  - [1748 - Pod resource requests/limits metrics](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/1748-pod-resource-metrics) - 1.22
- Alpha
  - [2305 - Metrics Cardinality Enforcement](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/2305-metrics-cardinality-enforcement) - 1.21
  - [647 - API Server Tracing](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/647-apiserver-tracing) - 1.22
  - [2845 - Deprecate klog-specific flags in k8s components](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/2845-deprecate-klog-specific-flags-in-k8s-components) - 1.23
- Pre-alpha
  - [2831 - Kubelet OpenTelemetry Tracing](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/2831-kubelet-tracing) - alpha in 1.24

> 

Reviewer 2: No mention of SIG Node? Seems odd.

Author: they didn't turn in a report

- Beta
  - [1981 - Windows Privileged Container Support](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/1981-windows-privileged-container-support) - v1.23
  - [2802 -Identify Windows pods at API admission level authoritatively](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/2802-identify-windows-pods-apiserver-admission) - v1.23
- Alpha
  - [1981 - Windows Privileged Container Support](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/1981-windows-privileged-container-support) - v1.22
  - [2802 -Identify Windows pods at API admission level authoritatively](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/2802-identify-windows-pods-apiserver-admission) - v1.23
- Pre-alpha (Targeting 1.24)
  - [2578 - Windows Operational Readiness](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/2578-windows-conformance/)

[`hostProcess`]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/1981-windows-privileged-container-support/
[sig-windows-dev-tools]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/sig-windows-dev-tools

#### [WG API Expression](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-api-expression/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives)

> - Server-side Apply went GA

Reviewer 2: Ideally: mention which release

in a KEP:
- [Change Block Tracking (CBT) API design](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.1olwavha9frv)
- [Volume Replication](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.pah3yke9ddug)
- [Data Protection for Managed Services Presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1IM6d0w3CDdHv1dLaFNXEcxy5fuDTr9LERAdMVkZiK9s/edit#slide=id.p)
- [Snapshot policy (immutable snapshot](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.gb8m7t8jro1v)
- [Volume Snapshot GA phases](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.w8v8tpkuw8ac)
- [Kubernetes Data Protection with Velero](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.iekhl8nl58lo)

[whitepaper]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/wg-data-protection/data-protection-workflows-white-paper.md#what-are-the-missing-building-blocks-in-kubernetes

#### [WG IoT/Edge](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-iot-edge/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives)

> The IoT/Edge Working Ground is moving to the CNCF ecosystem. Home to be announced soon.

Reviewer 2: Does this need more detail? Maybe skip the “Home to be announced soon” part here?

#### [WG Structured Logging](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-structured-logging/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives)

In 2021 The structured logging WG migrated kubelet, kube-scheduler, kube-proxy
to the new standard format.

Kubernetes Enhancements
Beta:
- [Structured Logging](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/1602-structured-logging) v1.23
Alpha:
- [Deprecation of klog specific flags](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-instrumentation/2845-deprecate-klog-specific-flags-in-k8s-components v1.23

### Appendix A

> ### Appendix B

Reviewer 2: No actual appendices

## Annual Report summary 21/22

This is a summary of the Kubernetes project’s contributor community and
activities. This report documents both quantitative measures of community
health (project milestones and snapshot) as well as qualitative measures of the
community as reported by community leaders and contributors to the project.

> Please see Appendices for full reports and program goals.

Author: ```suggestion

```

  [`OWNERS` file]. Maintainer is a good industry synonym.
- **Contributor Ladder:** [member, reviewer, approver, subproject owner].

For the community group mailing list, meeting times, and other contact info visit:
https://k8s.dev/groups

For community groups governance:
  - [SIG governance]
  - [WG governance]

[`OWNERS` file]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/docs/guide/owners/
[member, reviewer, approver, subproject owner]: https://git.k8s.io/community/community-membership.md
[SIG governance]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/sig-governance.md
[WG governance]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/wg-governance.md

## Data collection

The Kubernetes Steering Committee sent out a survey to all community group
leads to collect data for this report. Each individual group report may be
found in their respective directory inside the [Kubernetes Community repo].

For more, see:
[Program Documentation]

[Program Documentation]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/committee-steering/governance/annual-reports.md

## Contributor snapshot

> 62000 
> contributors all time
> 10000 new contributors this year
> 
> 1 
> new sig SIG K8s Infra, converted from WG
> 
> 3 
> emeritus leads 
> TODO: we need the stat for OWNERs 

Author: ```suggestion
62000   
contributors all time  
10000  
new contributors this year  
  
1   
new sig SIG K8s Infra, converted from WG  
  
```

- Beta
  - [1981 - Windows Privileged Container Support](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/1981-windows-privileged-container-support) - v1.23
  - [2802 -Identify Windows pods at API admission level authoritatively](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/2802-identify-windows-pods-apiserver-admission) - v1.23
- Alpha
  - [1981 - Windows Privileged Container Support](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/1981-windows-privileged-container-support) - v1.22
  - [2802 -Identify Windows pods at API admission level authoritatively](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/2802-identify-windows-pods-apiserver-admission) - v1.23
- Pre-alpha (Targeting 1.24)
  - [2578 - Windows Operational Readiness](https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/2578-windows-conformance/)

[`hostProcess`]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements/keps/sig-windows/1981-windows-privileged-container-support/
[sig-windows-dev-tools]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/sig-windows-dev-tools

#### [WG API Expression](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-api-expression/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives)

> - Server-side Apply went GA

Author: ```suggestion
- Server-side Apply went GA in 1.22
```

## Annual Report Summary 2021

This is a summary of the Kubernetes project’s contributor community and
activities. This report documents both quantitative measures of community
health (project milestones and snapshot) as well as qualitative measures of the
community as reported by community leaders and contributors to the project.

> Authors: The Kubernetes Steering Committee

Author: ```suggestion
Authors: The Kubernetes Steering Committee  
```

> Editor: Tim Bannister, @sftim, sig-docs Tech Lead 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Editor: Tim Bannister, @sftim, SIG Docs Tech Lead
```

- **OWNER:** a GitHub user who reviews, approves, and/or merges commits and is listed in an
  [`OWNERS` file]. Maintainer is a good industry synonym.
- **Contributor Ladder:** [member, reviewer, approver, subproject owner].

For the community group mailing list, meeting times, and other contact info visit:
https://k8s.dev/groups

For community groups governance:
  - [SIG governance]
  - [WG governance]

[`OWNERS` file]: https://www.kubernetes.dev/docs/guide/owners/
[member, reviewer, approver, subproject owner]: https://git.k8s.io/community/community-membership.md
[SIG governance]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/sig-governance.md
[WG governance]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering/governance/wg-governance.md

## Data collection

The Kubernetes Steering Committee sent out a survey to all community group
leads to collect data for this report. Each individual group report may be
found in their respective directory inside the [Kubernetes Community repo].

For more, see:
[Program Documentation]

[Program Documentation]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/committee-steering/governance/annual-reports.md

> ## Contributor snapshot

Reviewer 3: not sure the newlines render in markdown as you want when there's multiple items in a paragraph ("62000 contributors all time 10000 new contributors this year")

62000 
contributors all time
10000 new contributors this year

1 
new sig SIG K8s Infra, converted from WG

> 3 
> emeritus leads 
> TODO: we need the stat for OWNERs 

Author: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: still see the TODO, missing a push?

#### Things that no longer spark joy

There are plenty of processes, tools, and policy that are put 
together in a project lifecycle that eventually need to be phased 
out for whatever reason. A contributor painpoint that we've had with 
a codebase this large is [bazel]. The crews in SIG Testing and 
SIG Release put in a lot of time and attention on removing bazel
from kubernetes/kubernetes. There are some pieces left in 
kubernetes/test-infra but needless to say, we are on the road to 
moving on in our build processes.  

[bazel]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/2420

#### Growing Windows support 

Thanks to the SIG Windows team and surrounding groups for their efforts 
in growing the support in this space! A true testament to the power of the 
ecosystem. They have more upcoming work to do and we are looking forward 
to seeing their growth in 2022 and beyond. 

Details:
- Implemented hostProcess container support in Kubernetes (now in beta) and
pomoted adoption in multiple open source communities
- Defined the kubectl subcommand for fetching node-level logs.

> - Made the developer UX for windows transparent with sig-windows-dev-tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Made the developer UX for Windows transparent with sig-windows-dev-tools.
````

> - Defined windows operational readiness standards.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Defined operational readiness standards for Windows.
```

- Continue to talk about how we can do better in our monthly Chairs and Tech Leads and keeping our doors open for contributors to have these conversations with us.
- Keep educating contributors and OWNERs on the use of "Emeritus" and why it's ok to take breaks.

### Growth Areas

This section represents an area of the project that we've identified as having a growth opportunity or need.

#### What's project health anyway?

Some of the more mature groups like SIG Instrumentation or those with industry
open-source veterans can quickly identify areas of their components that need
help and tell stories about what's flourishing. Yet, it can be challenging to
establish universal indicators of "project health" in a project as large and
diverse as Kubernetes. We need to develop these indicators to provide signal to
the leads so that they may detect, pre-empt, or bubble up this information to
keep their area healthy.

#### Every group needs more reviewers

If you've been watching open source news over the last year, supply chain security has made headlines. According to OpenSSF and other security groups, [insert line about reviewers are important] 

> Reviewers are a key part of our success in quality code and documentation changes upstream. Reviewer is the next step on our [contributor ladder](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/community-membership.md) post member 

Author: ```suggestion
Reviewers are a key part of our success in quality code and documentation changes upstream. Reviewer is the next step on our [contributor ladder](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/community-membership.md) post Org Member; however, you don't need to be in an OWNERs file as a Reviewer to review. Anyone can leave a comment or an "/lgtm" (looks good to me!). As we try and grow top level approvers, sticking around and getting into an OWNERs file as a Reviewer is crucial for our sustainability as a project to keep pace.  
```

> - talk about showing up and sticking around
> - talk about chopping wood and carrying water first 
> - maybe include the reviewer graph stats 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 

Author: As a data point, in 1.19, the average daily PR reviewers were down -15% across Kubernetes Orgs and -24% in the Kubernetes/Kubernetes repo while still receiving the same amount of issues and PRs. If you are trying to get a change into Kubernetes, this will effect you.

a skills one. Sticking around, chopping wood, and carrying water is the main
formula for growing OWNERs and leaders on the project.

An example of an intentional contributor ladder growth effort happened in SIG 
Docs by growing its contributor and reviewer base in 2021. They introduced a 
shadow program for PR Wrangling and dedicated more time to being active in 
the `#sig-docs` Slack channel, helping grow the community. SIG Docs also worked on
a leadership transition strategy to bring community members into leadership 
roles via a specialized six-month group mentorship program. They were able to 
cultivate leaders for the SIG and some of its subgroups, adding new co-chairs 
and tech leads.

SIG CLI deserves another great shoutout for having long-standing Chairs and
Tech Leads take the emeritus route while growing new leaders into the roles.
Thanks for your service and great job, team!

#### Amping up Kubernetes security

Every group in Kubernetes has a responsibility to make sure we are putting
our best foot forward with supply chain security. Accolades to all of
SIG Release, SIG Auth, and SIG Security for their sustained efforts in this
area that include: 
- generating SBOMs, 

> - complining to SLSA 3 standards, 

Author: ```suggestion
- compliance with [SLSA 3 standards](https://slsa.dev), 
```

[reviewers and approvers should apply]: https://groups.google.com/a/kubernetes.io/g/dev/c/6F3h0Z1QzVg

#### Independent contributors play a critical role on the project

A misconception is that this project is just cloud providers maintaining it;
however, one of our biggest contributor bases are "[independent]" that is, not
affliated with an organization. 

There is space for everyone here. 

[independent]: https://k8s.devstats.cncf.io/d/8/company-statistics-by-repository-group?orgId=1&from=1609480800000&to=1641016800000&viewPanel=1&var-period=d7&var-metric=committers&var-repogroup_name=All&var-repo_name=kubernetes%2Fkubernetes&var-companies=All

##### What have we done?

Connect folks to jobs! While not all indie contributors are looking for
employment, many are. This year we worked with CNCF to add a feature to the
[cncf.jobs.io site], which allows employers to indicate a percentage of time
that they would support upstream activities. The Kubernetes project needs more
contributors with employer-backed time, and this was a great step toward that
goal. Aligning contributors with the right incentives is the sweet spot for
lasting contributions. 

> [cncf.jobs.io site]: https://cncf.jobs.io

Author: ```suggestion
[jobs.cncf.io site]: https://jobs.cncf.io
```

[Steering Committee]: https://git.k8s.io/community/committee-steering#contact

#### Niche contributor documentation /help-wanted

With one of the largest decentralized distributed open-source projects out
there, expect our contribution guides to be in-depth and extensive.
[k8s.dev/guide] is our primary guide; no matter where you contribute to the
project, you start there. But because the project is so large, some groups have
other style guides, code review processes, and more that define how they do
business and operationalize. This is an important part of our [values]. Same 
thing at big employers: everyone gets the standard onboarding docs, but 
your department might have an additional "here's how to get work done" 
document floating around. 

Many of our groups reported in that they have a hard time keeping [this
information] up to date, if they even have this kind of documentation at all. This 
is a great way to get involved if you are new to a group! Want to become an OWNER? 
Set someone up for success behind you by creating documentation for your area.

[k8s.dev/guide]: https://k8s.dev/guide

> [this information]:

Author: ```suggestion
[this information]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/contributors/devel
```

contributors are burning out, there is no one solve all solution here. 
Aligning incentives to grow OWNERs seems to be one of the main challenges in 
this space. 

#### What have we done
- Reducing the release cadence. While this wasn't the only reason for having 
3 and not 4 releases in a year, 

### Growth Areas

An area of the project that we've identified as having a growth opportunity or need to grow

#### What's project health anyway?

Some of the more mature groups like SIG Instrumentation or those with industry
open-source veterans can quickly identify areas of their components that need
help and tell stories about what's flourishing. Yet, it can be challenging to
establish universal indicators of "project health" in a project as large and
diverse as Kubernetes. We need to develop these indicators to provide signal to
the leads so that they may detect, pre-empt, or bubble up this information to
keep their area healthy.

#### Every group needs more reviewers

If you've been watching open source news over the last year, supply chain security has made headlines. According to OpenSSF and other security groups, [insert line about reviewers are important] 

> Reviewers are a key part of our success in quality code and documentation changes upstream. Reviewer is the next step on our [contributor ladder](link to URL) post member 

Author: ```suggestion
Reviewers are a key part of our success in quality code and documentation changes upstream. Reviewer is the next step on our [contributor ladder](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/community-membership.md) post member 
```

in a KEP:
- [Change Block Tracking (CBT) API design](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.1olwavha9frv)
- [Volume Replication](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.pah3yke9ddug)
- [Data Protection for Managed Services Presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1IM6d0w3CDdHv1dLaFNXEcxy5fuDTr9LERAdMVkZiK9s/edit#slide=id.p)
- [Snapshot policy (immutable snapshot](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.gb8m7t8jro1v)
- [Volume Snapshot GA phases](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.w8v8tpkuw8ac)
- [Kubernetes Data Protection with Velero](https://docs.google.com/document/d/15tLCV3csvjHbKb16DVk-mfUmFry_Rlwo-2uG6KNGsfw/edit#heading=h.iekhl8nl58lo)

[whitepaper]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/wg-data-protection/data-protection-workflows-white-paper.md#what-are-the-missing-building-blocks-in-kubernetes

#### [WG IoT/Edge](https://git.k8s.io/community/wg-iot-edge/annual-report-2021.md#current-initiatives)

> The IoT/Edge Working Ground is moving to the CNCF ecosystem. Home to be announced soon.

Author: ```suggestion
The IoT/Edge Working Ground is moving to the CNCF ecosystem. 
```
